## Trimodal IPMs

- Data and code from the paper entitled "Net effects of life-history traits explain persistent differences in abundance among similar species"

Abstract: Life-history traits are promising tools to predict species commonness and rarity because they influence a population’s fitness in a given environment. Yet, species with similar traits can have vastly different abundances, challenging the prospect of robust trait-based predictions. Using long-term demographic monitoring, we show that coral populations with similar morphological and life-history traits show persistent (decade-long) differences in abundance. Morphological groups predicted species positions along two, well-known life-history axes (the fast-slow continuum and size-specific fecundity). However, integral projection models revealed that density-independent population growth () was more variable within morphological groups, and was consistently higher in dominant species relative to rare species. Within-group  differences projected large abundance differences among similar species in short timeframes, and were generated by small but compounding variation in growth, survival, and reproduction. Our study shows that easily-measured morphological traits predict demographic strategies, yet small life-history differences can accumulate into large differences in  and abundance among similar species. Quantifying the net effects of multiple traits on population dynamics is therefore essential to anticipate species commonness and rarity. 
